 Bond market has stabilised more over the past month, according to the Bank of Thailand.
A Bank of Thailand official said on Wednesday the country's bond market has stabilised more over the past month but has not completely recovered, after a period of volatility during the coronavirus pandemic.

"Investor confidence has returned ... but not quite normal yet," Assistant Governor Vachira Arromdee told a news conference.

The central bank has set up a 400 billion baht corporate bond stabilisation fund to backstop the corporate debt market and reduce risk.

"The fund is a preemptive move to build investor confidence, Ms Vachira said. "It acts as a field hospital. If it's not used, that's good."

The fund, which is available from Wednesday, will provide bridge financing to firms registered and operating in Thailand with investment-grade bonds maturing during 2020-2021, excluding state companies, financial institutions and subsidiaries.

But firms must first secure other sources able to take up at least half of their bonds being rolled over before they seek support from the stabilisation fund.

The fund will buy bonds of up to 270 days and charge interest rates higher than the market plus a facility premium of about 1% to 2%, Mr Vachira said.

Krung Thai Asset Management is the manager of the fund, which will stop operations at the end of next year, unless it is used up before then.

Overall corporate bonds due to mature in May and June are worth about 200 billion baht, of which about 68% carries credit ratings of higher than "A-" and about 22% has ratings between "BBB+" and "BBB-", Vachira said in a statement.

During May-December, debt worth about 670 billion baht will mature, she added. 

The Bank of Thailand left its benchmark interest rate unchanged after an emergency cut last week, while projecting the worst contraction in the economy since the Asian financial crisis more than two decades ago.

The bank slashed its growth forecast for this year, now expecting the economy to shrink 5.3 percent compared with an earlier estimate of 2.8 percent expansion. Exports and tourism, the key drivers of Thailand’s economy, have both been hard hit as the coronavirus outbreak spreads around the world.

The policy rate was maintained at a record low 0.75 percent Wednesday following a 25 basis-point reduction at an unscheduled meeting March 20. Four of the seven monetary policy committee members voted to hold, two called for a cut and one wasn’t able to attend.

“We believe they can cut by another 25 basis points. They could have used all the space they have now,” said Burin Adulwattana, chief economist at Bangkok Bank Pcl. “The economy is on the brink of a recession with huge downside risk, so it’s time to do all they can.”

Bank of Thailand Assistant Governor Titanun Mallikamas said Wednesday that policy makers stand ready to lower rates further if needed and will keep a close watch on markets, including the baht exchange rate. In a statement delivered through the Bank of Thailand’s Facebook page due to social-distancing precautions, he said the economy would recover only next year.

The benchmark SET Index extended gains after the decision, surging 6.3 percent to 1,099.32 as of 3:32 p.m. in Bangkok. The baht fell 0.3 percent against the dollar, paring an earlier loss of as much as 0.5 percent.

[Image: Suvarnabhumi airport remained a ghost town on Wednesday. The Bank of Thailand expects the pandemic to come under control in the second quarter.?(Photo by Somchai Poomlard)]   Suvarnabhumi airport remained a ghost town on Wednesday. The Bank of Thailand expects the pandemic to come under control in the second quarter.?(Photo by Somchai Poomlard)
The Bank of Thailand on Wednesday forecast the economy to shrink by 5.3% this year, the first contraction since the 2008 global financial crisis, but stayed unchanged on the policy interest rate.

The coronavirus pandemic is the major factor hurting economies worldwide and has taken a heavy toll on Thailand's tourism and exports this year, said Don Nakornthab, senior director for economics and policy at the central bank.

The Bank of Thailand earlier predicted economic growth of 2.8% for 2020.

"The 5.3% contraction forecast does not take into account monetary and fiscal policy to support economic growth," Mr Don said. "The government's emergency decree, especially to curtail people's movements, will help curtail new infections."

The public sector is the only engine available to support the economy, he said.

The central bank maintained its projection for government consumption growth at 2.6% this year, while cutting its public investment growth view from 6.3% to 5.8%.

The forecast for export growth in dollar terms was lowered from 0.5% to an 8.8% contraction, and import growth from 1.4% to a 15% contraction.

The central bank also cut its forecast for Thailand's 2020 private consumption from 3% growth seen last December to a 1.5% contraction, and private investment from 3.4% growth to a 4.3% contraction.

Mr Don said the outbreak is spreading on a wider scale than the central bank's earlier estimate, particularly outside of China.

Based on data from the Public Health Ministry, the central bank expects coronavirus infections in Thailand to come under control in the second quarter, around April, but a turnaround for tourism will take time.

If Thais cooperate with government measures, especially migration and social distancing, the infection rate will be controlled and the economy will benefit eventually, Mr Don said.

The bank forecasts 2021 GDP growth of 3%, he said.

The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) on Wednesday voted 4-2 to leave the policy rate on hold at a record low of 0.75% after last Friday's unscheduled rate cut of 25 basis points.

Two members voted to cut the policy rate by 25 basis points, while one member was absent.

MPC secretary Titanun Mallikamas said the committee's view is that the economy will drastically contract in 2020 as tourism and merchandise exports are hit by the pandemic, the slowdown of trading partner economies and supply chain disruptions in many countries.

"In this situation, fiscal measures are key to alleviating the impact on the economy and helping segments affected by the outbreak," Mr Titanun said. "The MPC supports the government's measures, especially those targeted at helping affected groups."

The emergency policy rate cut on Friday was made to address liquidity strains, and accelerated debt restructuring for borrowers, especially households and small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs), must be urgently implemented to be meaningful, in the committee's view. Targeted measures designed to address liquidity needs are crucial.

Mr Titanun said financial institutions' assistance measures for borrowers will help ease their burden and contribute to economic expansion next year if the outbreak subsides.

The stability of Thai financial markets, especially the bond market, has improved after the central bank implemented measures to boost liquidity, though developments still warrant monitoring.

Although commercial banks' lending rate cuts in the wake of previous policy rate cuts helped borrowers to a certain extent, vulnerabilities increased in some areas, especially the debt servicing capability of households and SMEs, which could deteriorate from the significant economic contraction.

Against this backdrop, coordination between monetary and fiscal measures is urgently needed to support households and SMEs, Mr Titanun said.

"The central bank will stand ready to use additional policy tools in an appropriate and timely manner," he said.

Thailand's gems and jewellery sector has suffered from the pandemic, with the Gem and Jewelry Institute of Thailand (GIT) forecasting exports to contract this year.

Duangkamol Jiambutr, director of GIT, said the rate of the contraction will depend on how long the pandemic spreads.

Prior to the outbreak, GIT forecast shipment growth of 3% this year.

Gem and jewellery exports rank third for Thailand's total export value, trailing automotive and parts, and computers and parts.

The industry employs more than 700,000 staff.

Last year, gems and jewellery exports including gold topped US$15.7 billion (489 billion baht), up 30.3% from the previous year. In baht terms, export value amounted to 486 billion baht, up 26.6% from the previous year.

Excluding volatile gold, the shipments fetched $8.09 billion, up 6.34% over 2018, while in baht terms the total was 251 billion, up 2.70%. Key export markets included Asean, India, the Middle East and Hong Kong.

"We have to wait and see if May is any clearer as most shipments of high-value products need to be sent by air," she said. "If we reopen for arrivals of Chinese tourists, a rapid recovery is likely."

Ms Duangkamol said gems and jewellery are among the top 10 items on Chinese shopping lists, so Thai operators should prepare for a spree once Chinese tourists return.

She said GIT consulted representatives from the Thai Bankers' Association and the gems and jewellery industry yesterday, asking for cooperation from banks for soft loans to increase firms' liquidity in exchange for retaining workers during the crisis.

"In our discussions with the bankers, they said small and medium-sized entrepreneurs are now eligible to secure soft loans at a 2% annual interest with a six-month interest-free period," said Ms Duangkamol.

D ESPITE COUPS, floods and mass protests, visitors have flocked to Thailand in recent decades. Almost 40m of them arrived last year to blister on its beaches and dance in its discos. But as the globe shuts down because of covid-19 and holidaymakers stay at home, the land of smiles feels glum. Travel and tourism, broadly defined, were worth more than 3.5trn baht ($109bn) in 2018, according to the World Travel and Tourism Council, equivalent to about 20% of the country’s GDP. The Kasikorn Research Centre, a Thai outfit which conducts economic analysis, estimates that if the covid-19 pandemic lasts into September, Thailand’s losses will amount to 400bn baht ($12.1bn).

The country has scrambled to respond to the coronavirus, which has infected at least 1,771 people. But the policies adopted were initially confused. At first foreign visitors were required to present embassy approvals and certificates declaring themselves free of covid-19 before boarding planes to Thailand. Now a state of emergency has been declared and the country’s borders are closed to foreign visitors. Bangkok is under a “soft lockdown”, with entertainment venues and malls shut. The governor of Phuket, normally a tourist hub, declared there is now a curfew in place for visitors between 8pm and 3am.

The economic response to covid-19 has been more robust. On March 10th the government unveiled a stimulus package worth $12.7bn, about 2.5% of GDP, which includes tax deductions for businesses and a 20bn baht fund for workers affected by the pandemic. On March 24th the government promised another 45bn baht in cash handouts. The Bank of Thailand, the country’s central bank, cut its key interest rate by 25 basis points to 0.75% after a special meeting on March 20th. It is also leading efforts to shore up systemic liquidity by offering special credit facilities and support for bond markets, among other measures. More is likely to be needed.

The Thai economy seemed sickly even before the new coronavirus emerged. It grew by just 2.4% last year, the slowest pace since 2014. This year it seems sure to shrink. Growth has been disappointing for more than a decade. From 2009 to 2019, Thailand’s growth rate (3.6% on average) lagged behind poorer neighbours like Vietnam (6.5%) and the Philippines (6.3%), and even richer ones such as Malaysia (5.3%). A small number of huge firms, family-owned businesses and state-owned enterprises dominate the economy. They face little pressure from competitors to innovate.

The poverty rate has stagnated for the past few years, having fallen dramatically in the decades before (see chart). About a tenth of the population lives on less than $2.85 a day. Average household consumption declined in 2017-18, while household debt stands at about 80% of GDP, one of the highest ratios in Asia. About a third of the labour force still works in agriculture, which is plagued by inefficiency. Thailand’s most severe drought in decades has cut production of sugar, rice and rubber.

Thailand’s demography is not too appealing to investors either. The country is ageing: its fertility rate is lower than Europe’s. Over a quarter of Thais will be older than 65 by the middle of the century. It took France 160 years for the share of its population aged 65 or above to rise from 7% to 21%; the UN estimates Thailand will do the same in just 35 years. The elderly lack retirement savings—national surveys suggest that eight in ten of them rely on income from their children.

Thailand’s low labour costs once persuaded carmakers, steel producers and others that it was a good place to build factories. But competitiveness had been slipping. Against the dollar the Thai baht was one of the best-performing currencies in Asia last year. The coronavirus has reversed those gains, but Thai workers’ wages still seem expensive when compared with those in places like Vietnam. In December Mazda, a Japanese carmaker, shifted production of its SUVs to Japan. In February General Motors, an American giant, pulled out of Thailand altogether.

This combination of economic ills would test the wisest lawmakers. Thailand’s elites are distracted by internal strife. There have been two coups since 2006. Almost five years of military rule damaged Thailand’s international standing and prevented it from negotiating free-trade agreements with Western countries, argues one Bangkok economist. The government prefers flashy but ineffective schemes like “Thailand 4.0” which includes the Eastern Economic Corridor (EEC), a special economic zone.

There are some small spots of good news as Thailand tackles covid-19. Its universal health-care system means citizens will have greater access to help when ill than many others in developing countries. And the government’s existing welfare scheme means it is ready to funnel money to people through the crisis. Building new infrastructure, such as a new railway and airport planned near Bangkok, would bolster its competitiveness in the long term. But the grim truth is that Thailand’s maladies will outlast the pandemic.

The United States Trade Representative (USTR) in its annual Special 301 Report is expected to keep Thailand on its Watch List (WL) thanks to improvements in intellectual property (IP) protections, said a source at the Commerce Ministry.

That report is scheduled to be released on Thursday. Thailand was lifted from the USTR's Priority Watch List (PWL) and placed on the WL in 2017 after it had been left on the PWL for 10 years, said the source.

The country has amended several laws concerning intellectual property protections to scale up prevention of intellectual property violations on the internet and allowing websites to be blocked that violate copyright of foreign films, songs and TV series, said the source.

More amendments were passed to improve the efficiency of tackling bootleg films, which allowed Thailand to join more international treaties on intellectual property protection, said the source.

Thailand has also formed a national committee on the prevention and suppression of intellectual property violations.

Those efforts have demonstrated the government regards intellectual property violations as an issue of national importance, the source added.

Altogether, the source said the intellectual property situation in Thailand has improved.

On March 30 when the USTR published its 2020 National Trade Estimate Report, it said that while Thailand has made progress on intellectual property protection and enforcement, including by improving coordination on enforcement efforts to combat counterfeit and pirated goods and by taking legislative and administrative steps to address backlogs for patent and trademark applications, other concerns remain.

The US expressed worries about the availability of counterfeit and pirated goods, both in physical markets and online, as highlighted by the continued inclusion of Patpong Market in Bangkok in the Out-of-Cycle Review of Notorious Markets.

Other concerns include the widespread use of unlicensed software in both the public and private sectors, extensive cable and satellite signal theft, "camcording" of movies, overly broad exceptions to laws that penalise the unauthorised circumvention of technological protection measures, and continuing lack of effective enforcement against online piracy and counterfeiting, said the report.

Thailand was urged to adopt a more effective system to fight intellectual property violations and improve trade fairness, said the source.

The International Intellectual Property Alliance had prepared a report and submitted it to the USTR along with a proposal to keep Thailand on the WL along with seven other nations.

The IMF downgraded the economic forecast for Thailand in 2020 to a contraction of 6.7%, making it the worst performer among its Asean peers if the multinational lender's projection holds true. The revision is attributed to the economic toll of the coronavirus.

Despite this, the IMF raised its estimate for Thailand's economic growth to 6.1% next year, according to the "World Economic Outlook: The Great Lockdown" report released yesterday.

The IMF in January predicted the Thai economy will expand 2.5% this year and 3.5% in 2021.

The Bank of Thailand trimmed the country's 2020 growth outlook last month to a 5.3% contraction from a 2.8% expansion after the coronavirus spread escalated. The central bank also predicted a contraction in every quarter, with the deepest from April to June.

On Tuesday, Thai Bankers' Association (TBA) said the Thai economy could suffer a loss of 1.3 trillion baht, representing 7.7% of GDP, because of damage from the spiralling coronavirus, on par with the economic contraction from the financial crisis of 1997.

The association also warned the economic slump could deepen if the outbreak cannot be contained by the end of the second quarter.

According to the IMF's table, Singapore, Malaysia and Cambodia are projected to have their economies shrink by 3.5%, 1.7% and 1.6%, respectively, in 2020.

Vietnam has emerged as the Asean's best performer in the report at 2.7% growth, followed by Myanmar at 1.8% growth.