HONG KONG

Chinese e-commerce giant JD.com Inc. has filed confidentially for a second listing in Hong Kong, according to people with knowledge of the matter, joining rival Alibaba in tapping the city’s stock market for funds. The offering could raise at least $15.5b (US$2b), the sources said.

The deal comes after Alibaba Group Holding Ltd. raised $100.75b (US$13b) in a Hong Kong share sale last year.

JD’s listing could come as early as the second half of the year, according to one of the sources. Deliberations are ongoing and the size of the offering could still change. A representative for JD.com didn’t immediately respond to requests for comment.

Read more from Bloomberg. 

Do you know more about this story? Contact us anonymously through this link.

Click here to learn about advertising, content sponsorship, events & rountables, custom media solutions, whitepaper writing, sales leads or eDM opportunities with us.

Exports down 5.8% to $323.6b in March
Exports to India, Thailand and Singapore posted double-digit declines.

The total exports of goods dipped faster at 5.8% YoY in March to $323.6b, from the 4.3% fall posted in February, according to data from the Census and Statistics Department (C&SD). On a quarterly basis, exports dropped 9.7% YoY in Q1.

Exports to India (-17.2%), Thailand (-15.6%) and Singapore (-14.5%) countered the increases seen in the exports to China (+8.4%), Vietnam (+1.2%) and Taiwan (+0.9%). Overall, exports to Asia rose 3.2% YoY in March.

Apart from destinations in Asia, declines were recorded in exports to the UK (34.2%), Germany (-33.1%) and the USA (-29.3%).

As for commodities, a fall in exports was felt in non-metallic mineral manufactures (by $13.6b or -62.2%), telecommunications and sound recording and reproducing apparatus and equipment (by $12.3b or -19.4%) and miscellaneous manufactured articles (by $3.7b or -20.8%). On the other hand, exports of ‘electrical machinery, apparatus and appliances, and electrical parts thereof’ edged up 8% YoY, whilst office machines and automatic data processing machines inched up 9.2% YoY.

Meanwhile, total imports of goods likewise slipped 11.1% YoY to $358.4b in March, following the 0.1% fall in February. Decreases were registered in imports from some major suppliers, particularly the US (-29.5%), Malaysia (-19.6%), the Mainland (-14.1%) and the Philippines (-10.3%). Increases were recorded in imports from Vietnam (+24%), Singapore (+9.8%) and Taiwan (+9.7%).

By commodities, imports of telecommunications and sound recording and reproducing apparatus and equipment, non-metallic mineral manufactures and ‘electrical machinery, apparatus and appliances, and electrical parts thereof’ fell, whilst power generating machinery and equipment edged up in March.

As a result, a trade deficit of $34.7b, equivalent to 9.7% of the value of imports of goods, was recorded in March.

Do you know more about this story? Contact us anonymously through this link.

Click here to learn about advertising, content sponsorship, events & rountables, custom media solutions, whitepaper writing, sales leads or eDM opportunities with us.

Hong Kong banks' asset quality battered by COVID-19 and protests
Exodus of corporate clients, mortgage risks, and dropping credit card use pose a big threat on revenues.

For Hong Kong, the COVID-19 outbreak couldn’t have come at a worse time. Industry performance and consumer sentiment are already at record lows over the past half year, hampered by the social protests that took the city by storm, and earlier waned by the onslaught of trade tensions and mainland China’s slowing economy. A combination of these factors drove the economy to contract 1.5%—its first annual decline since 2009. Now officials and enterprisesare bracing for an extended period of decline as airlines suspend flights and overseas markets tighten their borders.

This spells trouble for local banks, who may see their bad debts rise as large corporates and small and medium enterprises (SMEs) struggle to pay back their loans.

“Hong Kong is an international city and thrives on people coming and going to do business in Hong Kong. To prevent itself from importing coronavirus means shutting its borders to visitors from high risk locations. How well and how long the economy may endure such drastic measures has yet to be tested,” Brian Chan, partner, banking & capital markets for Hong Kong at Deloitte, told Asian Banking & Finance in an exclusive interview.

As of end-September 2019, loans related to travel and tourism, hospitality, and entertainment accounted for about 5% of systemwide loans, wholesale and retail trade comprised about 4%, credit cards and other personal loans about 8%, and property-related loans including mortgages about 30%.

The lower economic activity will also dent banks’ revenue for the year. “We would expect revenue and profit estimates to be revised downward given the current situation. In particular revenue will be under pressure: we can expect loan growth to be impacted due to lower economic activity and less demand for lending,” noted Paul McSheaffrey, partner, head of banking & capital markets for Hong Kong at KPMG.

McSheaffrey added that the potential impact on global growth from COVID-19 will also make any rise in interest rates unlikely.

Disrupted operations
Already, banks have closed down stores in an effort to mitigate the spread of the virus. Bank of East Asia temporarily closed 20 physical branches starting 1 February, including those in Causeway Bay and Wanchai Convention Plaza. UOB also shuttered its commercial banking centre in Kwun Tong until mid-February due to the outbreak.

A total of 243 bank branches have suspended their services since Chinese New Year, representing 19% of the 1,200 branches operating in the city, according to Deloitte. Some outlets that remained open also restricted their operating hours.

The full impact of these closures remains to be seen since most bank-related transactions are done electronically, noted Deloitte’s Chan.

“[Although] retail branches serve as one of many touch points that banks service their customers [they] are not the major channel for banking business any more. A typical retail bank handles 80-90% of its transactions through electronic means instead of through a bank teller,” he explained.

Instead, the exodus of corporate clients, mortgage risks, and dropping credit card use poses the biggest threat on banks’ revenues.

With corporates’ profitability and liquidity challenged, banks exposed to retail, restaurants, tourism, education and transportation sectors—the most impacted industries by the outbreak—will see credit deterioration. Of these, SMEs may not weather the economic shock and may go into bankruptcy should the outbreak persist, warned Chan.

Meanwhile, although the average loan-to-value (LTV) ratio provides ample cushion for banks, a drastic fall in property prices increases collateral risk.

Apart from prices, homebuyer demand will likely be dampened further by the outbreak, which was already strained by the protests, S&P Global Ratings’ stated in a report. The firm warned that transaction volumes during the SARS epidemic hit an all-time low, and history could repeat itself.

The length of the outbreak also weighs on workers’ wages and salaries, and any cuts would also slash credit card usage and push credit quality to deteriorate, Deloitte’s Chan added.

Similarly, S&P warned of a negative impact on banks’ credit card receivables should the unemployment rate rise. During the 2003 SARS crisis, Hong Kong's unemployment rate rose to an all-time high of about 8.5%. The jobless rate was 3.3% at end-2019, according to data from the Labour and Welfare Department.

Meanwhile, KPMG’s McSheaffrey sees a rise in bad debts the longer the outbreak persists. “This would probably be most likely to occur in the unsecured personal lending and SME sector as these are the sectors most impacted. We may also see some increase in bad debts for larger corporates, including potentially those with operations in China, although this will depend on the impact of government measures to support business.”

But McSheaffrey noted that, in general, the level of bad debts in Hong Kong’s banking sector has been low. “The banking sector is well capitalized and so should be able to absorb the increase in bad debts,” he added.

Fitch Ratings also said that Hong Kong banks are still well-positioned as of now, as less than 1% of mortgage loans were in negative equity compared with the 30% in June 2003 during the SARS crisis. Further, the LTV ratio for new mortgages was only 53% in December 2019 compared with 65% in June 2003.

A short-term outbreak would likely have little effect on their operations, added Fitch, given banks’ sufficient capital and liquidity buffers.

Likewise, Deloitte’s Chan said that local banks’ had so far not yet been affected.

“The number of people infected with COVID-19 is still very small. The loss to banks caused directly by coronavirus is therefore very limited. It is the precautionary measures implemented by governments, business, banks and customers that make an impact on the economy,” he noted.

Analysts agreed that the end-result will depend on how long the government’s measures will continue to take place.

Despite the branch closures, KPMG’s McSheaffrey has not seen any significant impact—at least, not yet. “We are not seeing any significant disruption to banking operations within Hong Kong. Banks have implemented their Business Continuity Plans. Teams who operate critical functions, such as remittances and payments, are generally working at alternate BCP sites and/or under split team arrangements to ensure these critical functions can still operate.”

Both Deloitte and Fitch agreed that there is still room to recover if the outbreak is contained fast.

“In general, if the outbreak is contained within months, certain banking business[es] might be delayed but may catch up later in the year,” said Deloitte’s Chan.

“However, if the outbreak sustains, banks may need to adjust itself to any structural changes in the economy to achieve their growth targets,” he concluded.

Prices of financial assets are also headed towards declines if disruptions from the outbreak persists, according to Moody’s Investors Service. “This will result in declines in the values of mark-to-market securities held by banks and falls in revenue from financial markets,” they concluded.


Protests’ impact lingers
The coronavirus upsurge came at the heels of the social protests that crippled Hong Kong’s economy in the second half of 2019 and riveted the rest of the world.

This has created a dent in profitability due to increased costs, as banks’ revisited their operating procedures and risk measures.

“The recent social unrest greatly affected banks' operations in two aspects. Most of the banks will review and revisit their Business Continuation Plan (BCP) just in case if their HQ is being compromised by the social unrest. The other major impact is to review and reinforce security measures to protect the branch operation particularly those with Chinese background and affiliation,” noted accounting firm BDO’s Managing Director of Assurance Clement Chan.

“The overall results of the social unrest have created a dent on the profitability because of increased costs incurred for the above-mentioned reaction and the forced closure due to sudden outbreak of movement and demonstration.”

BDO’s Chan said that they had noted cases where banks have to incur extra cost to purchase PCs and install appropriate alternative structure for BCP.

“We have seen access to branches at the regularly affected area are heavily guarded around the sensitive hours to minimise the chance of being sabotaged,” he added.

Any growth that banks’ expected to happen in the second half of the year was stopped and in some cases was turnaround to red, BDO’s Chan further noted.

HSBC, for example, increased its provision for expected credit losses by US$400m in Q3, with which the protests were cited as the driving force for the higher provisions. Despite this, HSBC reported a 7% growth in profits for its Hong Kong operations for the full year of 2019, and its local banking operations recorded growth.

In a similar vein, Citibank Hong Kong said in an exclusive correspondence that their business had not been materially impacted in Q4 2019, but noted that client sentiment remained cautious.

Citi Hong Kong’s franchise grew for the 12th consecutive quarter in Q3 2019. Revenues also rose 8% YoY, driven by solid growth in our balance sheet with average deposits up 10% and loans up 6%.

“There is a strong pipeline of business not only for Citi but across the market and this will support and underpin Hong Kong’s role as a major financial centre,” said James Griffiths, spokesperson of Citi Hong Kong. “Key Hong Kong corporates remain active and we continue to see good deal flow. Our treasury clients continue to use Hong Kong as a key treasury hub.”

M&A volumes in HK also reportedly remained healthy during the year, with inbound volumes up 50% to US$4.4b as of November YTD and outbound running at US$41b over the same period, he added.

BDO’s Chan added that banks who are less reliant on retail banking were likely not much affected by the protests. “In general, banks that are less reliant on retail banking business will find the social unrest less disruptive. However, the extent of negative sentiment created by the social movement will drag down the economy through its effect on the retail and property market which ultimately will affect all banks,” he said.

He left one piece of advice for banks: “Adopt a conservative strategy to sail through this storm.” 

Do you know more about this story? Contact us anonymously through this link.

Click here to learn about advertising, content sponsorship, events & rountables, custom media solutions, whitepaper writing, sales leads or eDM opportunities with us.
Hong Kong business leaders reveal how they are coping, and adapting, to the new environment.

It’s a whole new world out there in 2020, and a whole new Hong Kong business environment. The protests and social unrest of last year are no longer top of mind for most of the city and its economy. That mantle has been taken by the new severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus, which causes the highly dangerous coronavirus disease, or COVID-19. In 2020, Hongkongers are focused on facemasks, handwashing, and social distancing as they work to “flatten the curve” of infection across the SAR.

Hong Kong is handling the pandemic well, at least comparative to many other countries and markets. As of the end of March, its government had not been forced to enact the strict  lockdowns that have been a key pillar of public responses in Italy, the UK, the US, and Australia.

Still, that might be on the cards as this issue of Hong Kong Business goes to print. On 2 April, the Hong Kong government ordered all pubs and bars to close for two weeks—with many analysts expecting a longer and wider lockdown will be announced soon.

Businesses are obviously being impacted, with the nature of those impacts being wide and varied. Clearly, airlines, hospitality, and retail businesses have each suffered a huge drop in demand as customers choose, or are forced to stay away—and there have been thousands of jobs lost in these sectors. Hong Kong’s unemployment rate hit a nine-year high in February, at 3.7%, but even the most optimistic forecasts see that growing even further in the months ahead.

Other sectors are facing issues around getting workers to the places they need to be, and ensuring their health and safety in this new regime of avoiding human contact and close interaction. Many technology and office-based businesses have been forced to move to work-from-home arrangements for the majority of their remaining staff.

Meanwhile, essential service providers, including hospitals and healthcare providers, transport and logistics, and even supermarkets are all making do with the resources they have available to them in the best possible way.

View from the top
Hong Kong Business spoke to seven prominent leaders, from a broad range of sectors operating in the Hong Kong market. We asked each about how their organisations had fared over the tumultuous first quarter of 2020, and the specific challenges being faced as well as the solutions being developed. Their responses show a strong level of resilience across the business community here. For some, it has been the chance to test out some business continuity processes developed for this very situation, whilst others have adapted as the pandemic escalated, creating some new case studies in innovation and ingenuity. These are their stories.
Robert Walters: Ricky Mui, managing director
Robert Walters: Ricky Mui, managing director 
How has the COVID-19 pandemic affected your company’s operations?

Our company has always had a business continuity policy in place supported by our various departments, which we have also started implementing since the pandemic outbreak. This means we can smoothly change our operations from onsite to remote working in a short period of time to ensure minimal impact to our operations.

We also communicated with our clients and candidates immediately, and on a regular basis, to ensure they are well supported at all times. Robert Walters is a global business and when the pandemic has made a global impact, some of our overseas offices have also implemented their business continuity plan.

However, this does not cause much issue to our collaboration and communication since our group has always been a technology-led business.

What changes have you had to make with regards to staffing?

Thanks to technology, all our consultants are equipped with devices to allow them to work remotely. This has also minimised the impact to our business, by allowing us to interview candidates and contact clients over the phone or other virtual meeting and video conferencing platforms such as Skype, Zoom, and Webex.

Apart from the working from home option, we have also split our staff into two teams, and they can choose to come to work on a roster basis. Our HR team also ensures we don’t over reach a certain number of staff in the office at one time.

What measures have you implemented to help customers?

Recruitment is very human oriented, and social distancing is causing much disturbance on some of our customers’ recruitment process. We’ve advised them on the latest technology available, and helped them in conducting first-round interviews over video conferencing tools, such as Webex, Skype, and Zoom.

What has been the effect from a revenue and cost standpoint?

We have always been a fiscally responsible organisation and therefore the immediate effect on cost has been manageable, however, it is likely that plans for future initiatives may need to be reassessed.

However, we are also expecting cost savings through working from home rather than operating a full CBD office.

Holman Fenwick Willan: Patrick Yeung, Hong Kong office head 
How has the COVID-19 pandemic affected your company’s operations?

We are continually monitoring the developing Covid-19 outbreak and implementing contingency plans to protect our colleagues, clients, and everyone in the HFW community.

We have systems in place to allow remote working across our international network, and we continue to be available for our clients during this difficult time. Our lawyers are working with clients across our sectors and international network to help them minimise the impact of the coronavirus on their business—and to prepare for what’s next.

What changes have you had to make with regards to staffing?

We have followed the Hong Kong Government’s direction and implemented work from home arrangements and flexible working hours to limit the number of staff in the office, and avoid staff traveling during peak hour. For those in the office, we provide face masks, hand sanitiser, and distancing measures.

The changes we have made are designed to maintain business-asusual operations at HFW, whilst at the same time safeguard our clients, staff, and their families.

What measures have you implemented to help customers?

Client care is critical to us and we very quickly created a dedicated COVID-19 website hub with a host of information available, including briefings and articles that provide the latest advice on the issues our clients are facing.

We quickly assembled a COVID-19 Leads group that includes HFW Industry Leaders who draw expert insight on the latest legal and commercial developments surrounding COVID-19. With the majority of physical events being cancelled we have moved our events online in the form of webinars.

This enables us to continue to share our knowledge and stay connected with our clients.

What has been the effect from a revenue and cost standpoint?

Our financial performance has remained relatively stable and many of our service areas are extremely busy, working alongside our clients to mitigate risks and advise on current and future strategy plans. We recognise the extreme challenges our clients are facing and we are committed to working shoulder to shoulder with them.
Mazars: Stephen Weatherseed, managing director 
How has the COVID-19 pandemic affected your company’s operations?

Like most businesses in Hong Kong, we have followed the Government instructions to civil servants and encouraged work from home, and of course banned all travel out of Hong Kong. Staff with family members who have arrived from overseas have also been required to be self-quarantined. And all international meetings, seminars and conferences have been cancelled until at least September 2020. 

All of this, plus the disruption to our clients’ own operations, has made our working life more hectic, more stressed, and less productive. Nevertheless we have been able to meet our deadlines and continue working with our clients.  

What measures have you implemented to help your customers?  

The most practical has been in communicating online rather than in person, and this has included accessing documents and other information online too. 

We are communicating closely with our clients to help them navigate the challenges, to understand and to plan ahead, especially when it comes to cash management at this time.  

Could you share with us your future plans amidst this pandemic?  

It is difficult to plan ahead when we really do not yet have visibility of when the global lockdown will finish, or even when travel to and from Mainland China will be re-established.  

All we can do is plan a few months ahead, and keep abreast of developments locally, in China, in Asia and globally, and be ready to react.  

We are planning longer term with an assumption that a “new normal” will be established within the next 12-18 months, and our thinking is that we expect Mazars’ strong growth globally to continue. 
Michael Page: Anthony Thompson, regional managing director 
How has the COVID-19 pandemic affected your company’s operations?

Across the APAC region we have seen an impact in almost all markets but at different times. In recent weeks we have seen impacts increase in HK and Singapore along with Japan, India and our other offices in Southeast Asia.

As with our China experience there is certainly an impact in the level of hiring activity and in the willingness of clients and candidates to make recruitment decisions. There is still considerable recruitment activity however, and in certain sectors, we have seen a surge in hiring.

What changes have you had to make with regards to staffing?

We have not made any material changes to staffing numbers in Asia however we have had to adapt to considerable differences in working arrangements.

During February in China and recently in other parts of the region, we have had a large percentage of our people operating from home some or all of the time. Fortunately our technology allows us to operate remotely in a very effective fashion both in individual markets and across the region.

This has not been without its challenges but overall we have managed to be more productive than we had anticipated.

What measures have you implemented to help your customers?

As much useful communication as possible. This has been through phone calls and social media, one on one and through broader communication. The nature of our business means that we are able to quickly understand how a wide variety of companies and people are dealing with the situation, and we have endeavoured to share this feedback as much as we can.

In China we have conducted several webinars with hundreds of customers dialling in.

What has been the effect from a revenue and cost standpoint?

Such circumstances do have an impact on short-term results but thus far there has still been meaningful levels of activity, and therefore revenue. We have endeavoured to eliminate nonessential costs, and clearly travel throughout the region has been reduced significantly.

Jetstar Asia: Bara Pasupathi, CEO 
What has been the effect from a revenue and cost standpoint?

The impact of this pandemic is delivering the single biggest shock the aviation industry has ever faced. At Jetstar Asia we are working hard to contain the impact as much as possible and are focused on protecting jobs, preserving cash and reducing costs.

Cost containment initiatives include salary cuts for the senior leadership team and I, as the CEO, will not be taking salary during this suspension period. We are asking our people to take paid and unpaid leave, in addition to cancelling annual bonuses.

To reduce costs, we are looking to innovate, challenge the norms and embark on new ways of working across all business segments.

How has the COVID-19 pandemic affected your company’s operations?

As a result of new government border measures across multiple jurisdictions and the subsequent fall in travel demand, Jetstar Asia made the decision to temporarily suspend all services for an initial period of three weeks, from 23 March to at least 15 April.

This represents the temporary grounding of all Jetstar Asia’s 18 A320 aircraft.

What changes have you had to make with regards to staffing?

To support our dedicated and talented crew during the temporary suspension of our flights, we have been working with government agencies to find temporary job opportunities as part of the public response.

To date, more than one third of our Singapore-based crew have taken up contract positions for a period of one to six months.

What measures have you implemented to help your customers?

We understand this impacts our customers and we apologise for any inconvenience caused. For any Jetstar Asia customer affected by this suspension we will give a full refund in the form of a travel credit voucher to anyone with an existing Jetstar Asia booking for travel between 15 March and 30 April.

BDO: Johnson Kong, managing director of non-assurance and Clement Chan, managing director of assurance 
How has the COVID-19 pandemic affected your company’s operations?

COVID-19 has affected our company’s operation in many different and significant ways. In normal times, a big part of our work needs to be performed at our clients’ workplaces, but the travel restrictions have made that almost impossible.

In addition most of our work needs to be performed by teams of different levels of staff on a project basis. As you can imagine, social distancing and quarantine requirements make our normal work arrangement almost impossible in terms of execution.

What changes have you had to make with regards to staffing?

We are relying heavily on digitisation and IT. We need to change all our meetings into video conferencing. On the part of the work that we can perform offsite, we have asked our clients to transmit the required information to us electronically so that we can perform the work in our office.

As for the part that we need to perform onsite, we are having to rely on staff sent by our network firms on the ground.

What measures have you implemented to help customers?

We have encouraged our clients to shift to virtual meetings and to use our portals in transmitting important information timely for our work. These alternative measures make our delivery of work still possible under these extremely adverse and difficult circumstances caused by lockdowns and other forms of travel restrictions.

What has been the effect from a revenue and cost standpoint?

We have tried our best to keep our production line going, so that our normal operation could still function and hopefully will sustain our normal cash flow. The effect on our costs has been a mix, as we have savings on the travelling costs which are somehow offset by additional costs such as IT hardware, sanitary and health-related accessories, and subcontracting costs.

Could you share with us your future plans beyond the pandemic?

The fact that we can still largely cope with the work requirements through no traveling, work from home, flexi-hours, exchange and sharing of information through portals, teleconferencing, etc. will provide us with good experience to fine tune our entire mode of operation when the pandemic is over.

HSBC's Q1 profit halved to $3.2b
Weakening oil prices hurt the bank.

HSBC’s profit before tax for January to March halved to $3.2b from $6.2b a year ago, below the average analyst forecast of $3.7b, reports Reuters.

The bank increased its expected credit impairment charges to $3b due to the pandemic, with provisions likely to range from $7b to $11b.

Weakening oil prices also impacted the quarterly result on the back of “a significant charge related to a corporate exposure in Singapore,” the report said. HSBC is amongst the leading creditors of Singaporean oil trader Hin Leong, which is currently under court-appointed supervision to restructure billions of debt.

The bank wants to minimise operating costs to mitigate the plunge in revenue, leading to “marginally lower” profitability in 2020 than last year.

Here’s more from Reuters.
