An Indonesian medical team conducting drive-through swab tests for the coronavirus in Tangerang on Monday (April 6). Indonesian Finance Minister Sri Mulyani Indrawati is optimistic that his country's economic growth will still grow in the positive zone although it is slowing down amid the outbreak. - AFP

JAKARTA: Indonesian Finance Minister Sri Mulyani Indrawati is optimistic that his country's economic growth will still grow in the positive zone although it is slowing down amid the Covid-19 (coronavirus) pandemic.

"Three countries that will still survive or are in the positive zone are Indonesia, China and India," she said during a working meeting with the House of Representatives' Commission XI here on Monday (April 6).

The growth is in accordance with the projections of international financial institutions such as the Asian Development Bank (ADB) in April 2020 which said that Indonesia's economic growth this year reached by 2.5 percent, the minister was quoted by Antara news agency as saying.

The World Bank projects Indonesia's economic growth to range from negative 3.5% to 2.1%.

Meanwhile, Moody's rating agency projects that Indonesia's economic growth will reach 3% this year and will again increase in 2021 by 4.3%.

With this projection, Indonesia's economic growth is still better than those of several big countries in the region. - Xinhua/Asian News Network

Indonesia’s economy is expected to grow by only 2.5 percent this year, from a four-year low of 5.02 percent in 2019, according to a new Asian Development Bank (ADB) report. The situation, caused largely by the COVID-19 outbreak, is expected to gradually improve in 2021.

ADB’s flagship annual economic publication titled "Asian Development Outlook 2020" indicates that the COVID-19 pandemic, along with lower commodity prices and volatile financial markets, will have severe implications for the global economy and Indonesia this year, with the economies of the country’s key trading partners expecting to suffer. 

“Despite Indonesia’s strong macroeconomic fundamentals, the COVID-19 outbreak has changed the course of the economy, with the external environment deteriorating and domestic demand weakening,” ADB country director for Indonesia Winfried Wicklein said in a press statement released Friday.

“If decisive actions to contain the health and economic impacts of the outbreak, particularly to safeguard the poor and vulnerable, can be effectively implemented, the economy is expected to gradually return to its growth trajectory next year," he added.

[Image: Indonesia GDP growth forecasts by Asian Development Bank (ADB).]  Indonesia GDP growth forecasts by Asian Development Bank (ADB). (ADB/Asian Development Outlook 2020) 

ADB is among a slew of institutions predicting that the COVID-19 pandemic will significantly slow Indonesia’s economic growth this year. The World Bank, for instance, predicted that growth will sit at 2.1 percent in 2020, down from 5.1 percent initially projected, if the situation starts to normalize by June.

This compares with the government’s expectation of 2.3 percent economic growth in its baseline scenario this year, the lowest since 1999, which could deteriorate to a 0.4 percent economic contraction in a worst-case scenario.

Read also: Indonesia’s economy may contract 0.4% in worst case scenario: Sri Mulyani 

The ADB report says domestic demand is expected to weaken, as business and consumer sentiment wanes. However, as the global economy is poised to recover next year, Indonesia’s growth is expected to gain momentum, with recently introduced investment reforms providing an additional impetus.

Inflation, which averaged 2.8 percent last year, is forecast to edge up to 3 percent in 2020, before declining to 2.8 percent in 2021, the report reads. Inflationary pressure from tight food supplies and currency depreciation is expected to be partially offset by lower prices for non-subsidized fuel, as well as additional subsidies for electricity and food.

Meanwhile, export earnings from tourism and commodities are projected to decline, leading to a current account deficit of 2.9 percent of GDP in 2020. As exports and investment resume in 2021, a higher volume of imported capital goods will keep the current account deficit at the same level as 2020.

ADB says the government and financial authorities have deployed "well-coordinated" and "targeted" fiscal and monetary measures to mitigate the impact of a pandemic on the economy and people’s livelihoods, including the "timely" disbursement of social transfers for the poor and vulnerable, as well as tax cuts and loan-payment relief for workers and businesses.

"Externally, risks to Indonesia’s economic outlook include an extended outbreak of COVID-19, further declines in commodity prices, and increased finance market volatility. Domestically, the outlook will depend on how quickly and effectively the spread of the pandemic can be contained. Constraints in the healthcare system, along with the challenges of imposing social distancing, could worsen the impact on the economy," the press release reads.

JAKARTA, INDONESIA (3 April 2020) — Indonesia’s economy is expected to grow by 2.5% in 2020 amid the novel coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic, down from 5.0% in 2019, according to an Asian Development Bank (ADB) report released today.

“Despite Indonesia’s strong macroeconomic fundamentals, the COVID-19 outbreak has changed the course of the economy, with the external environment deteriorating and domestic demand weakening,” said ADB’s Country Director for Indonesia Winfried Wicklein. “If decisive actions to contain the health and economic impacts of the outbreak, particularly to safeguard the poor and vulnerable, can be effectively implemented, the economy is expected to gradually return to its growth trajectory next year.”

According to ADB’s flagship annual economic publication, Asian Development Outlook (ADO) 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic, along with lower commodity prices and volatile financial markets, will have severe implications for the global economy and Indonesia this year, with the country’s key trading partners expecting negative impacts on their economies. Domestic demand is expected to weaken, as business and consumer sentiment wanes. As the global economy recovers next year, Indonesia’s growth is expected to gain momentum, with recently introduced investment reforms providing additional impetus. 

Inflation, which averaged 2.8% last year, is forecast to edge up to 3.0% in 2020, before declining to 2.8% in 2021. Inflationary pressure from tight food supplies and currency depreciation is expected to be partially offset by lower prices for non-subsidized fuel, as well as additional subsidies for electricity and food. Meanwhile, export earnings from tourism and commodities are forecast to decline, putting the current account deficit at 2.9% of gross domestic product in 2020. As exports and investment resume in 2021, higher volumes of imported capital goods will keep the current account deficit at the same level as 2020.

The government and financial authorities have deployed well-coordinated, targeted fiscal and monetary measures to mitigate the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on the economy and people’s livelihoods. These measures include timely disbursement of social transfers for the poor and vulnerable, as well as tax cuts and loan-payment relief for workers and businesses.

Externally, risks to Indonesia’s economic outlook include an extended outbreak of COVID-19, further declines in commodity prices, and increased finance market volatility. Domestically, the outlook will depend on how quickly and effectively the spread of the pandemic can be contained. Constraints in the health-care system, along with the challenges of imposing social distancing, could worsen the impact on the economy.

ADB is committed to achieving a prosperous, inclusive, resilient, and sustainable Asia and the Pacific, while sustaining its efforts to eradicate extreme poverty. Established in 1966, it is owned by 68 members—49 from the region.

Jakarta's light rail. - The Jakarta Post

JAKARTA (The Jakarta Post/ANN): The Indonesian government has outlined a worst-case scenario where the domestic economy could contract by 0.4 per cent as the Covid-19 pandemic arrests swaths of economic activity and poses recessionary risks to Southeast Asia’s largest economy.

Finance Minister Sri Mulyani Indrawati said the baseline scenario was for economic growth to sit at 2.3 per cent this year as trade contracted and consumption and investment growth slowed.

“We are forward-looking, so the steps we’re taking are preventive measures, ” Sri Mulyani said at a media briefing on Wednesday (April 1).

Covid-19 had disrupted household activities, hampered firms’ sales and revenue and had hit micro, small and medium businesses, she added.

President Joko “Jokowi” Widodo announced Rp 405.1 trillion (US$24.8 billion) in extra spending on Tuesday to finance Indonesia’s fight against Covid-19. Of this, Rp 150 trillion will be set aside for economic recovery programs, Rp 75 trillion for healthcare spending, Rp 110 trillion for social protection and Rp 70.1 trillion for tax incentives and credits for enterprises. - The Jakarta Post/Asia News Network

Workers at a Light Rail Transit (LRT) construction in Jakarta during large-scale social restriction (PSBB) on Monday. (Antara Photo/Rivan Awal Lingga)

Sharp Correction to Indonesia's Economic Growth Expected as Global Recession Looms
BY :NOVY LUMANAUW, LENNY TRISTIA TAMBUN

APRIL 14, 2020

Jakarta. President Joko "Jokowi" Widodo said on Tuesday the economic impact from the Covid-19 pandemic has the potential to trigger a global recession in 2020, and economic growth in Indonesia is likely to see a sharp correction.

"According to the latest numbers that I received, the global economy will decline by minus 2.8 percent, which means it can go as low as minus 6 percent," Jokowi said during a limited cabinet meeting at the Merdeka Palace in Jakarta.

Several international institutions, including the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank, have predicted that global economic growth in 2020 will enter a period of recession. 

Previously, Finance Minister Sri Mulyani estimated economic growth in the country this year would only reach 2.3 percent, far below the pre-pandemic forecast of 5 percent.

"This situation is not only occurring in Indonesia but also in other countries," Jokowi said. 

However, he stressed that the government is preparing itself for a number of different scenarios and must be optimistic.

"We must continue to work hard in the recovery efforts [from the pandemic], both in terms of public health and economically," Jokowi said.

The president said ministries and government institutions must remain focused on their original mission to accelerate bureaucratic and structural reforms.

He said the government must prepare for continued impact from the Covid-19 pandemic on Indonesia's economic growth in 2021.

"We must remain vigilant on the continued impact of Covid-19 on our economy in 2021. We must calculate all the potentials, opportunities, as well as risks, both domestically and globally," the president said. 
