The Navotas City local government has stepped up its efforts to protect the welfare of the abused children through opening the first Child Protection Unit in the city.

Dra. Christia Padolina, Navotas City Hospital (NCH) director, said that the facility aims to integrate into one place medical, forensic, therapeutic and preventive responses to the physically and sexually abused children.

Through the building of the unit, she added, the said children will be provided with the necessary health and psychosocial services, and could “minimize, if not prevent, the re-traumatization [that they could experience].”

“[The unit] is like a one-stop shop,” she said.

“We have a doctor, a police officer and a social worker, trained by the Philippine General Hospital, whom the children could talk to at one time,” she added.

Unlike before when children who have experienced abuse cases had to be put first under police custody, they will now be directed to the hospital already where assigned personnel will take care of them.

This way, it lessens the trauma that they could experience because they do not have to tell their stories all over again and relive what they have experienced, Padolina furthered.

The unit has several rooms. These include an interview room where guardians could see their child as they talk.

During the inauguration on Tuesday, Mayor John Rey Tiangco said that they “pushed for the establishment of the Women and Children Protection Unit not just…to comply with the law but also to manifest [their] concern and active response to gender issues and special circumstances of [the] women and children.”

Among the 721 public hospitals required by law to have a Child Protection Unit, the Navotas City Hospital has one of the only 94 hospitals that have the said unit, the public information office said.

“We can now proudly say that NCH is among the public hospitals in the country equipped to provide immediate and straightforward services to abused women and children,” Tiangco added.
Students of Philippine Science High School together with their parents rallied in front of the PSHS campus in Quezon City Thursday to protest the decision of the Board of Trustees (BOT) to allow six of their schoolmates to graduate despite the pending cases of child abuse and cybercrime after they allegedly posted online numerous private photos and videos of female students, all of whom are minors.

[Image: Philippine Science Highschool (Quezon City campus)]  
Philippine Science Highschool (Quezon City Campus)


“If you choose to fight, we are here for you and we will stand behind you. So please find in your heart that you’re ready to speak up, we’re here,” student organizer Ericka Aala said.

PSHS campus director, Dr. Lawrence Madriaga, said the school respected the action but advised the protesters to file a formal appeal before the BOT.

“While we recognize the fact na they have the right to [free] expression, the official thing to do is put it in writing,” Madriaga said.

An appeal was actually sent by the protesters in an open letter signed by the officers of the PSHS MC Executive Parent Teacher Council where they said that, “… .the recent decision of the BOT to reverse the findings of the PSHS Management Committee in connection with the voyeurism, sexual harassment, lewd acts, grave threats and possibly other criminal acts by a cabal, nay a syndicate of students belonging to Batch 2019 is a travesty to [the PSHS] core values . . .”

The parents are also now planning to file criminal charges against the perpetrators.

The PSHS BOT is chaired by Secretary Fortunato T. de la Peña of DOST with DepEd Secretary Leonor Briones as Vice-Chairman.  Among the members of the BOT are Senator Bam Aquino, Congressman Erico Aumentado, Ms. Lilia Habacon, Dr. Josette Biyo, UP President Atty. Danilo Concepcion, and Mr. Honesto Franz Nuqui.

According to one of the victim’s parents, the posting of private photos of some female students began as early as the school year 2017 to 2018 and the incident was only brought to light this year.

Notwithstanding denials from Malacanang, President Rodrigo Duterte’s personal choice for speaker will emerge as the next leader of the House of Representatives.

The new leadership of the c which counts for at least 46 proclaimed partylist groups as members, admitted that the House member to be supported by the group for speaker will be the one that Duterte will anoint.

Marinduque Rep. Lord Allan Velasco, who was among the three bets for the speaker that were scheduled to meet the PCI yesterday, said the president’s political party PDP-Laban will submit to Duterte a list of possible speakership hopeful from which the chief executive will choose from.

Velasco is among the candidates for speaker belonging to PDP-Laban. The two others are former speaker and Davao del Norte Rep. Pantaleon Alvarez and Pampanga Rep. Aurelio Gonzales.

Velasco discussed his program for the speaker with the PCI headed by its newly-elected president, 1Pacman Partylist Rep. Mikey Romero.

Nominees of 36 of the 51 proclaimed winners in the partylist polls were present at the organizational meeting held at Marco Polo Hotel in Pasig City. Ten other partylist groups sent representatives.

Ako Bicol Partylist Rep.Alfredo Garbin, partymate of murdered PCI president Rep. Rodel Batocabe, said the partylist group will also await Duterte’s declaration on whom to support in the speakership race.

“I always say that the common denominator of all major political parties including the partylist coalition is that kung sino ang iendorso ng ating president will gravitate towards, papunta dun yung membership at ang boto,” Garbin said.

With at least 20 18th Congress members expected to form the minority bloc when the day of electing a speaker comes, the combined PDP-Laban and the PCI votes may already give Duterte’s choice for speaker an advantage.

There will be at least 289 votes left after deducting the number of opposition candidates from the total 309 House memberships.

PDP-Laban has won 85 seats while the PCI is assured of 54 members for a total 139 congressmen voting for the Duterte choice for speaker.

Garbin said the new PCI leadership is awaiting President Duterte’s decision while Velasco admitted that the list of PDP-Laban nominees has yet to be sent to Malacanang.

But as the two groups continue to wait for Duterte’s anointed speakership bet, presidential daughter Davao City Sara Duterte has come all out for Velasco as the next speaker.

Duterte, the chairperson of Hugpong ng Pagbabago regional party, has recently assailed the camps of Velasco’s rivals for the top House post.

She chided Surigao del Norte Rep. Prospero Pichay for claiming that she has chosen Lakas-CMD chairman and returning Leyte Rep. Martin Romualdez for speaker.

The lady mayor also rejected the offer of reconciliation by PDP-Laban secretary general and Davao del Norte Rep. Pantaleon Alvarez even as she assailed returning Taguig Rep. Alan Peter Cayetano for warning her that Velasco’s election as speaker will cause the disintegration of the House coalition supportive of her father’s administration.

Cayetano and Romualdez were expected to appear at the PCI meeting to discuss their respective program for speaker.

Garbin said Alvarez and other candidates will also be given time to campaign for PCI support.
The self-confessed gunman of slain businessman Dominic Sytin continues to insist that the victim’s brother ordered the killing.

[Image: The diagram of the Dominic Sytin murder case (AARON RECUENCO / MANILA BULLETIN)]  
The diagram of the Dominic Sytin murder case (AARON RECUENCO / MANILA BULLETIN)


In his counter-affidavit, gunman Edgardo Luib refuted the claims of Dominic’s brother, Dennis, who denied the wrongdoing.

“Salungat sa kaniyang pahayag, si Dennis Sytin ang utak o mastermind sa pagpaslang sa nakakatanda niyang kapatid na si Dominic Sytin (Contrary to his statements, Dennis Sytin is the brains or mastermind in the killing of his older brother Dominc Sytin),” read Luib’s counter-affidavit.

Luib filed the counter-affidavit before the Department of Justice (DOJ) panel of prosecutors led by Senior Assistant State Prosecutor Juan Pedro Navera.

Meanwhile, the panel has concluded the conduct of its preliminary investigation over the complaint filed by Dominic’s wife, Anna Marietta, against the three suspects which included Luib, Dennis, and Oliver Fuentes who is also known as Ryan Rementilla.

“Si Ryan ay aking kababata. Siya ang kumontak sa akin ukol sa planong pagpatay kay Dominic Sytin (Ryan is my childhood friend. He contacted me regarding the killing),” added Luib who is a hired hitman involved in various killings.

The three suspects are accused of murder and frustrated murder in connection with the Nov. 28, 2018 shooting incident in front of the Light House Hotel inside the Subic Bay Freeport Zone which resulted in the killing of Dominic and the wounding of his bodyguard Efren Espartero Jr.

Luib’s filed the counter-affidavit to supplement his extra-judicial confession he made on March 6 following his arrest in Batangas on March 5 due to arrest warrants issued against him over other murder charges he is facing.

Fuentes had been employed at the United Auctioneers Inc. (UAI) but got fired by Dominic due to alleged anomalies.

While Dennis got removed from UAI as the chief operating officer by Dominic.

The Office of the Executive Secretary (OES) advised the public to not fall prey to those pretending to be Executive Secretary Salvador Medialdea in order to extort money from them.

[Image: Executive Secretary Salvador Medialdea (Malacañang Photo Bureau / MANILA BULLETIN)]  
Executive Secretary Salvador Medialdea (Malacañang Photo Bureau / MANILA BULLETIN)


In a notice to the public Thursday evening, the OES said there were individuals who have been using the name of Medialdea to solicit funds from the public.

“Notice is hereby given to the public that unscrupulous individuals have been using the Office of the Executive Secretary (OES), or name dropping the latter in fraudulent schemes to solicit funds from the public,” it said.

The OES then clarified that no one has been authorized to collect money from the public, especially in exchange for a government position.

“In particular, please be warned that the Office of the President (OP) or the OES has not authorized any person to solicit money or other things of value from the public in exchange for a position in government,” it added.

Medialdea is not the first Palace official to be the subject of a scam. In December last year, Presidential Spokesperson Salvador Panelo warned the public about people pretending to be him in social media to extort money from them.

The matter prompted Panelo to deactivate all his social media accounts so people can no longer use his name in scamming other people.

“As a result of this, I have decided to cut all my Facebook accounts, Messenger and everything, so they can no longer use it. So I’m telling you now, anybody who uses my name or used my name, or anybody who comes out with a Facebook account. That’s a fake,” he said.

“I think this is the fifth scam that I received, using my name. And money had been deposited to accounts in the name of other people. I cannot.. I really cannot understand why these people who are supposed to know me, would believe that” he added.

He then said he can only think of one reason why scammers would use his name to fool other people.

“The only reason I think that I can conclude is that my name seems to be very credible, they’re using my name,” he said.
